Add JRuby examples in rules_advanced.md (#2451)
openhab/openhab-docs: tutorials/getting_started/rules_advanced.md

- abstract some of the sometimes verbose series of steps requires to do something (e.g. access an Item's metadata) into a single function call.

See the automation add-on's reference for how to access and install the Helper Library for your language of choice.

:::: tabs

::: tab JS

In the case of JavaScript Scripting, the Helper Library comes with the add-on (nothing to install separately) and it is automatically imported into your rules for you (advanced users can turn off that auto import in MainUI Settings -> JS Scripting).
To get the latest version of the Helper Library instead of waiting for the next release of OH, it can be installed using `npm`.

:::

::: tab JRuby

> The Ruby scripting is implemented using JRuby Scripting add-on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ruby scripting is implemented using the JRuby Scripting add-on.
```

It will install its helper library by default, and it is automatically imported into your rules.

> This can be configured or disabled in Main UI Settings -> JRuby Scripting.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The specific version used, along with any additional Ruby Gems, can be configured in Main UI Settings -> JRuby Scripting by modifying the `gems` setting.
```

> Additional Ruby Gems can be installed by specifying them in the `gems` configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

![select language](images/rules-advanced-select-lang.png)

This will open a blank text field where you can start typing your code.
This text field provides text highlighting and some code completion which helps with coding.

As with the Blockly example, we want to start the rule using a log statement we can see in openhab.log when the rule runs.

:::: tabs

::: tab JS

As previously mentioned, the Helper Library for this language comes with the add-on and is imported by default, so see the [JavaScript Scripting add-on's reference](/addons/automation/jsscripting/) for the full guide on how to do anything you might want to do.
For help with general JavaScript coding, there are tons of tutorials and reference documents on the web a search away.

One can either use the [log actions](/addons/automation/jsscripting/#log) but most will find it easiest to use the more JavaScript native [`console`](/addons/automation/jsscripting/#console).

```javascript
console.info('Motion was detected');
```

:::

::: tab JRuby

If you are new to Ruby, check out [Ruby Basics](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/file.ruby-basics.html) for a quick overview of the language.

> The Ruby language and the [JRuby Helper Library](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/) offers a streamlined syntax for writing file-based and UI-based rules, making it easier and more intuitive than RulesDSL, while delivering the full features of the Ruby language.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Ruby language and the [JRuby Helper Library](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/) offers a streamlined syntax for writing file-based and UI-based rules, making it easy and intuitive to work with openHAB constructs, while also delivering the full features of the Ruby language.
```

I don't think we need to specifically compare to other languages, since that's subjective.

Author: This is from an old text I've been copy pasting into our usage / readme etc. I'll update them too.

items.getItem('FrontPorchLight').sendCommand('ON');
```

:::

::: tab JRuby

In JRuby, openHAB Items are represented directly by their names.
You can also access them through the [items](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/OpenHAB/DSL.html#items-class_method) registry so you can find them using a string.
The Item object has a generic [#command](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/OpenHAB/Core/Items/GenericItem.html#command-instance_method) method and also command methods specific for each item type in openHAB.

```ruby
logger.info "Motion was detected"
FrontPorchLight.on # this sends the ON command to the Item

# The following lines do the same thing
# FrontPorchLight.command ON
# items["FrontPorchLight"].on

> # items["FrontPorchLight"].comand ON

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# items["FrontPorchLight"].command ON
```

actions.ScriptExecution.createTimer(time.ZonedDateTime.now().plusMinutes(30), lightsOut);
```

:::

::: tab JRuby

Timers are created by calling the [after](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/OpenHAB/DSL.html#after-class_method) method.

> It accepts a [Duration](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/OpenHAB/CoreExt/Java/Duration.html), a Ruby [Time](https://docs.ruby-lang.org/en/master/Time.htmll), or a java [ZonedDateTime](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/OpenHAB/CoreExt/Java/ZonedDateTime.html) object to specify when the timer should execute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It accepts a [Duration](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/OpenHAB/CoreExt/Java/Duration.html), a Ruby [Time](https://docs.ruby-lang.org/en/master/Time.htmll), or a Java [ZonedDateTime](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/OpenHAB/CoreExt/Java/ZonedDateTime.html) object to specify when the timer should execute.
```

That will cause the rule to create a new timer the next time the rule runs.
It could be coded to reuse the Timer instead which is an exercise for the reader.

:::

::: tab JRuby

In JRuby, an easy way to reschedule the same timer is done by providing a unique `id` to the timer.
This is called a [reentrant timer](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/OpenHAB/DSL.html#reentrant-timers).

The most convenient ID to use is the Item object for which the timer is operating, but you can use anything as the ID, e.g. a String, a number, the rule uid, etc.

```ruby
logger.info "Motion was detected"
FrontPorchLight.on

> after 30.minutes, id: FrontPorchLight do |timer|

Author: I've added additional sentences which could use some further review

That will cause the rule to create a new timer the next time the rule runs.
It could be coded to reuse the Timer instead which is an exercise for the reader.

:::

::: tab JRuby

In JRuby, an easy way to reschedule the same timer is done by providing a unique `id` to the timer.
This is called a [reentrant timer](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/OpenHAB/DSL.html#reentrant-timers).

The most convenient ID to use is the Item object for which the timer is operating, but you can use anything as the ID, e.g. a String, a number, the rule uid, etc.

```ruby
logger.info "Motion was detected"
FrontPorchLight.on

after 30.minutes, id: FrontPorchLight do |timer|
  logger.info "No more motion, turning off the light"
  timer.id.off # We can do this because the Timer's id was set to the item object
               # It is the same as FrontPorchLight.off
end
```

> While it may seem straightforward, the JRuby helper library manages the timer and rescheduling internally to reduce the need for repetitive code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While it may not seem straightforward, the JRuby helper library manages the timer and rescheduling internally to reduce the need for repetitive code.
```

Is this what you meant?

Author: I'm trying to say that the user code seems simple (straightforward), so I did mean to say "While it may seem straightforward" here. 

I will remove that whole clause to simplify the sentence.

now.isAfter(sunset) && now.isBefore(endTime)
```

:::

::: tab JRuby

```ruby

> Time.now.between? Sunset.state.to_s.."23:00"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Time.now.between?(Sunset.state.to_s.."23:00")
```

While Ruby (mostly) doesn't care if you use parentheses or not when calling methods, the general  consensus is to not use them for "macro" like calls (`after`, our triggers, etc. more likely fall under that category), and to do use them for all other calls. Predicates should definitely have them.

Author: Thank you. Changed

# Alternative code:

> # ZonedDateTime.now.between? Sunset.state.to_s.."23:00"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# ZonedDateTime.now.between?(Sunset.state.to_s.."23:00")
```

Author: Thanks

> # Time.now.between? Sunset.state, Time.parse("23:00") # Two arguments of date/time objects

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Time.now.between?(Sunset.state, Time.parse("23:00")) # Two arguments of different date/time types, but they are compatible
```

# Time.now >= Sunset.state && Time.now <= Time.parse("23:00")
# etc.
```

> [#between?](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/OpenHAB/CoreExt/Between.html#between%3F-instance_method) helper method is available on all Ruby and Java date, time, and Duration objects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [#between?](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/OpenHAB/CoreExt/Between.html#between%3F-instance_method) helper method is available on all Ruby and Java time types.
```

> It takes a Ruby [Range](https://docs.ruby-lang.org/en/master/Range.html) as its argument, or two Date/Time objects to perform an inclusive range comparison.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It takes a Ruby [Range](https://docs.ruby-lang.org/en/master/Range.html) as its argument, or two time types to perform an inclusive range comparison.
```

> Note that in JRuby, Date/Time and also DateTimeType objects (in the above example, the item's state) can all work interchangeably without any explicit conversions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that in JRuby, Ruby Time, Java ZonedDateTime and Instant, openHAB DateTimeType type (in the above example, the item's state), and several other time related types can all work interchangeably without any explicit conversions.
```

Note that I explicitly left out Ruby's Date type - while it exists and is compatible, its use is highly discouraged, and so shouldn't be mentioned in such a tutorial.

There are several third party openHAB specific libraries on `npm` already.
Search the forum for details.

:::

::: tab JRuby

You can install JRuby-compatible Gems from [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org) by listing them in the JRuby Script add-on [configurations](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/index.html#configuration).
Alternatively, [inline Bundler](https://bundler.io/guides/bundler_in_a_single_file_ruby_script.html) is available from inside your script.

```ruby
gemfile do
  source "https://rubygems.org"
  gem "faraday", "~> 2.12", ">= 2.12.2"
end
```

> [Personal libraries](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/index.html#shared-code) that contain your custom reusable constants, functions, data structures, and classes can be created and used inside your Script Actions and Conditions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Personal libraries](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/index.html#shared-code) that contain your custom reusable constants, methods, modules, and classes can be created and used inside your Script Actions and Conditions.
```

> Simply save a `.rb` file that contain your code in `$OH_CONF/automation/ruby/lib/` folder, then `require` it in your script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simply save a `.rb` file that contains your code in `$OH_CONF/automation/ruby/lib/` folder, then `require` it in your script.
```

Also add a suggestion that you can add your custom library to the auto-requires in the add-on settings.

For example, a personal library file in `$OH_CONF/automation/ruby/lib/mylibs.rb`:

```ruby
DESTINATION_EMAIL = "myemail@gmail.com"

def broadcast_alert(msg)
  Notification.send msg, title: "Alert!"

>   things["mail:smtp:local"].send_mail(DESTINATION_EMAIL, "OpenHAB Alert", msg)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  things["mail:smtp:local"].send_mail(DESTINATION_EMAIL, "openHAB Alert", msg)
```

There are several third party openHAB specific libraries on `npm` already.
Search the forum for details.

:::

::: tab JRuby

You can install JRuby-compatible Gems from [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org) by listing them in the JRuby Script add-on [configurations](https://openhab.github.io/openhab-jruby/main/index.html#configuration).

> Alternatively, the inline bundler is available from inside your script.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Alternatively, [inline Bundler](https://bundler.io/guides/bundler_in_a_single_file_ruby_script.html) is available from inside your script.
```
